As the world widely adopted computers, software became increasingly integral to more aspects of life. The inefficiencies in the software development process made it difficult to meet the rapidly increasing demand for computing resources and complex software. This led to what is known as the “Software Crisis” which began in the mid-1960s and lasted until the mid-1980s. During this period, software development often ran over budget, behind schedule, and consisted of unmanageable, buggy code. By the time older software solutions came to fruition, newer, better, and faster technologies had already been developed, causing software engineers to have to refactor their code, or completely redesign their system. Often software development solutions that worked for small software systems did not scale to large, complex projects.

Some of these issues still exist today, although to a much lesser extent due to the consistent application of engineering principles to the software development process.The solution to the “Software Crisis” involved transforming unorganized coding efforts into an established engineering discipline. The mid 1980s also saw a rise in the growth of computer-aided software engineering or CASE which also helped to relieve the software crisis. CASE tools can be divided into six categories: business analysis and modeling, development tools such as debugging environments, verification and validation tools, configuration management, metrics and measurement, and project management.

The term “software engineer” is often used interchangeably with software developer but there are subtle differences. Software engineers are also developers, but the term “software developer” is usually deemed narrower in scope than that of a software engineer. A software engineer’s knowledge is usually broader. Software engineers take a systematic, big picture approach in their thinking to software development whereas developers may have more creative approaches. Both software engineers and software developers have specialized knowledge, but software engineers use that knowledge to build entire systems whereas software developers use their knowledge to write code to implement specific functionality within a system. Software engineers are often employed on larger scale projects and they are focused on the broad structure rather than solving an immediate problem. Software engineers are tasked with designing, building, and maintaining software systems.

The Software Development Life Cycle, known as the SDLC, is a systematic process to develop high-quality software in a predictable timeframe and budget. The goal of the SDLC is to produce software that meets a client’s business requirements. The SDLC defines phases of the software development process that encompass their own process and deliverables. It is a cycle of planning, design, and development that can be implemented as an iterative approach to software development. Adherence to the SDLC minimizes risks and costs to the development of high-quality, deployable software. The software development life cycle began to take shape in the mid-1960s as software development began to necessitate a more detailed approach because of its growing complexity.In its initial conception, it used what is called the “waterfall method” to manage projects where the development of software follows a linear pattern through discrete stages. The SDLC has since been adapted, however, to more iterative methods in response to addressing customer needs and shifting requirements.

Here are some key advantages for businesses in following the SDLC. The first advantage is that it gives development teams a process to follow rather than using an ad hoc approach to improve efficiency and reduce risks. Secondly, there are discrete phases to the SDLC. Each phase is well defined so that team members know what they should be working on and when. Because of the well-defined phases, it facilitates communication between the customer, other stakeholders, and the development team.